NE-954: LoadBalancer Allowed Source Ranges Enhancement Proposal (#1177)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/ingress/lb-allowed-source-ranges.md

---
title: lb-allowed-source-ranges
authors:
  - "@suleymanakbas91"
reviewers: # Include a comment about what domain expertise a reviewer is expected to bring and what area of the enhancement you expect them to focus on. For example: - "@networkguru, for networking aspects, please look at IP bootstrapping aspect"  - "@frobware"
  - "@jerpeter1"
  - "@knobunc"
  - "@Miciah"
  - "@candita"
  - "@frobware"
  - "@rfredette"

>   - "@deads2k"

Author: Copy-paste mistake. I've added you now :+1:

approvers:
  - "@frobware"
  - "@Miciah"
api-approvers: # In case of new or modified APIs or API extensions (CRDs, aggregated apiservers, webhooks, finalizers). If there is no API change, use "None"
  - "@deads2k"
creation-date: 2022-07-08
last-updated: 2022-07-26
tracking-link: # link to the tracking ticket (for example: Jira Feature or Epic ticket) that corresponds to this enhancement
  - "https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NE-555"
see-also:
replaces:
superseded-by:
---

# LoadBalancer Allowed Source Ranges

## Summary

This enhancement extends the IngressController API to allow the user to specify a 
list of IP address ranges for an IngressController to which access to the LoadBalancer Service 
should be restricted when `endpointPublishingStrategy` is `LoadBalancerService`. 
By default, all source addresses are allowed (which is equivalent to
specifying "0.0.0.0/0"). Currently, the only way for the customers to limit this is by 
setting `.Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges` field for the LoadBalancer Service 
in front of the router in cloud environments. This is not desired as we prefer

> the customers use the APIs and do not directly modify the managed resources.

Reviewer: *nit* awkward wording here.
```suggestion
the customers use the APIs and to not directly modify the managed resources.
```

## Motivation

Customer security teams are concerned that the public ELB (created in 
the installation process by default) is allowing all inbound traffic on 0.0.0.0 
on ports 80 and 443, so they wish to restrict it. 

Customers have been setting `.Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges` of the LoadBalancer 
Service themselves, something that we did not plan to support but also did not 
actively reject. We recognize that users consider it now to be an existing feature 
while we prefer they use APIs and not directly modify managed resources.

The main motivation of this enhancement is to allow the customers through a new API 

> to enable and configure `.Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges`.

Reviewer: *grammar nit*: word ordering. Move `through a new API` to the end.
```suggestion
to enable and configure `.Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges` through a new API.
```

### User Stories

#### As a cluster admin, when configuring an IngressController, I want to limit access to the load balancer to a specified list of IP address ranges on the cloud provider for this ingress

The cluster admin has the option to modify the IngressController to specify 
a list of IP address ranges for an IngressController to which access to 
the load balancer should be restricted. This is available as a Day-2 operation 
to the cluster admin.

### Goals

> Enable the configuration of a range for load balancer via the `IngressControllerSpec`, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Enable the configuration of a range for a load balancer via the `IngressController.Spec`, 
```

which represents a list of IP address ranges. This is then used by the operator to set
`.Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges` of the LoadBalancer Service in front of the router 
in cloud environments.

> If `.Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges` of the LoadBalancer Service is set by the 

Reviewer 2: Since `AllowedSourceRanges` is used by the operator to set  `.Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges`, in the circumstance that the customer has set a value for `.Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges` in 4.11, why can't we translate this to `AllowedSourceRanges`, rather than flagging this cluster as unupgradable? Are there some circumstances where that wouldn't work or would be undesirable?

Author: After discussing this with @jerpeter1, we decided to go with "if and only if `AllowedSourceRanges` isn't set but `.Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges`  is set, then set `AllowedSourceRanges`  to `.Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges`.  Otherwise set `.Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges`  to `AllowedSourceRanges`".

// or "fd00::/8").
// +kubebuilder:validation:Pattern=`^(([0-9]|[0-9][0-9]|1[0-9][0-9]|2[0-4][0-9]|25[0-5])\.){3}([0-9]|[0-9][0-9]|1[0-9][0-9]|2[0-4][0-9]|25[0-5])/([0-9]|[12][0-9]|3[0-2])$`
type CIDR string
```

### Workflow Description

1. A cluster admin who wants to limit access to the load balancer to a list of IP address ranges
of their choice sets the `AllowedSourceRanges` field. 
2. Ingress Operator reconciles the LoadBalancer Service and sets the `.Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges`
based on `AllowedSourceRanges`.

#### Variation [optional]

N/A

### API Extensions

This proposal will modify the `IngressController` API by adding a new 
variable called `AllowedSourceRanges` to the `LoadBalancerStrategy` 
struct type and a new type `CIDR` that is a string in CIDR notation.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints [optional]

The value set for `AllowedSourceRanges` will be used to set `.Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges` 
of the LoadBalancer Service in front of the router in cloud environments.

If the customer directly sets `.Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges` of the LoadBalancer Service,
its value will be used to set `AllowedSourceRanges` if and only if `AllowedSourceRanges`

> was not initially set. Otherwise, `.Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges` is overwritten by `AllowedSourceRanges`.

Reviewer: If a user places `0.0.0.0/0`, are you going to do anything special? Will you ignore it? Or just pass it through to the service? Is it worth mentioning `0.0.0.0/0` as a special case?

Author: It will just be passed through to the service like any other value.

This risk is mitigated by using this value to set `AllowedSourceRanges` 
if and only if `AllowedSourceRanges` was not initially set.

### Drawbacks

This enhancement may bring additional complexity for the customers who are 
used to modify directly the `Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges` of the LoadBalancer 
Service for the same purposes. 

## Design Details

### Open Questions [optional]

1. On Kubernetes API reference, the field 
[`loadBalancerSourceRanges`](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/generated/kubernetes-api/v1.24/#service-v1-core) 
has the warning "This field will be ignored if the cloud-provider does not support the feature.".
However, there is no information about which platforms support this. Is there any platform
OpenShift runs on which does not support this feature?

### Test Plan

The controller that manages the IngressController Deployment and related
resources has unit test coverage; for this enhancement, the unit tests are
expanded to cover the additional functionality.  The operator has end-to-end
tests; for this enhancement, a test is added that verifies the operator 
correctly configures the load balancer service and updates the service 

> when the allowed source ranges are changed.

Reviewer: Could you enumerate the test cases? I think it might be important to spell out specific test cases so we don't forget (specifically, the second test is of interest to me):
1. Test adding/deleting/changing AllowedSourceRanges to IC and observing loadBalancerSourceRanges on the loadbalancer
2. Test adding loadBalancerSourceRanges to loadBalancer and observing AllowedSourceRanges on the IngressController in which it was unset previously.

Those are the main two I can think of, if I understand the proposal correctly. Thoughts?

Author: Agreed. I adjusted the EP.

---
title: lb-allowed-source-ranges
authors:
  - "@suleymanakbas91"

> reviewers: # Include a comment about what domain expertise a reviewer is expected to bring and what area of the enhancement you expect them to focus on. For example: - "@networkguru, for networking aspects, please look at IP bootstrapping aspect"  - "@frobware"

Author: Fixed.

  - "@jerpeter1"
  - "@knobunc"
  - "@Miciah"
  - "@candita"
  - "@frobware"
  - "@rfredette"
  - "@gcs278"
  - "@deads2k"
approvers:
  - "@frobware"
  - "@Miciah"
api-approvers: # In case of new or modified APIs or API extensions (CRDs, aggregated apiservers, webhooks, finalizers). If there is no API change, use "None"
  - "@deads2k"
creation-date: 2022-07-08
last-updated: 2022-07-26
tracking-link: # link to the tracking ticket (for example: Jira Feature or Epic ticket) that corresponds to this enhancement
  - "https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NE-555"
see-also:
replaces:
superseded-by:
---

# LoadBalancer Allowed Source Ranges

## Summary

This enhancement extends the IngressController API to allow the user to specify a 
list of IP address ranges for an IngressController to which access to the LoadBalancer Service 
should be restricted when `endpointPublishingStrategy` is `LoadBalancerService`. 
By default, all source addresses are allowed (which is equivalent to
specifying "0.0.0.0/0"). Currently, the only way for the customers to limit this is by 

> setting `.Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges` field for the LoadBalancer Service 

Author: Added.

## Motivation

Customer security teams are concerned that the public ELB (created in 
the installation process by default) is allowing all inbound traffic on 0.0.0.0 
on ports 80 and 443, so they wish to restrict it. 

Customers have been setting `.Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges` of the LoadBalancer 
Service themselves, something that we did not plan to support but also did not 
actively reject. We recognize that users consider it now to be an existing feature 
while we prefer they use APIs and not directly modify managed resources.

The main motivation of this enhancement is to allow the customers to enable 
and configure `.Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges` through a new API.

### User Stories

#### As a cluster admin, when configuring an IngressController, I want to limit access to the load balancer to a specified list of IP address ranges on the cloud provider for this ingress

The cluster admin has the option to modify the IngressController to specify 
a list of IP address ranges for an IngressController to which access to 
the load balancer should be restricted. This is available as a Day-2 operation 
to the cluster admin.

> ### Goals

Author: I've added this user story.

Enable the configuration of a range for a load balancer via the `IngressController.Spec`, 
specifically via the `LoadBalancerStrategy`, with a new parameter `AllowedSourceRanges`, 
which represents a list of IP address ranges. This is then used by the operator to set
`.Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges` of the LoadBalancer Service in front of the router 
in cloud environments.

If `.Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges` of the LoadBalancer Service is already set by the 
customer, its value is used to set `AllowedSourceRanges` if and only if `AllowedSourceRanges`

> was not initially set. Otherwise, `.Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges` is overwritten by `AllowedSourceRanges`.

Reviewer 3: In my opinion, this is too complicated and error-prone.  Here is what I had in mind:

* On OpenShift 4.11, block upgrade if `spec.loadBalancerSourceRanges` is set.
* On OpenShift 4.12, block upgrade if `service.beta.kubernetes.io/load-balancer-source-ranges` is set.
* Don't set `spec.loadBalancerSourceRanges` if `service.beta.kubernetes.io/load-balancer-source-ranges` is set.

Then the cluster administrator can migrate to the new API as follows:

1. Make sure that `service.beta.kubernetes.io/load-balancer-source-ranges` is set and `spec.loadBalancerSourceRanges` is unset.
2. Upgrade to 4.12.
3. Set `spec.endpointPublishingStrategy.loadBalancer.allowedSourceRanges` on the IngressController.  (The ingress operator will then set `spec.loadBalancerSourceRanges`, which takes precedence over the annotation.)  
4. Remove the `service.beta.kubernetes.io/load-balancer-source-ranges` service annotation.  

These are all implementation details though.  In my mind the goals are the following:

* Provide a supported API for configuring allowed source ranges for IngressControllers
* Migrate customers who currently are configuring allowed source ranges on the Service to using this new API.

Author: In the 3rd step, you say 

> (The ingress operator will then set spec.loadBalancerSourceRanges, which takes precedence over the annotation.)

At this point, the annotation is still set though. So, the ingress operator should not set `spec.loadBalancerSourceRanges` according to the other statement 

> Don't set spec.loadBalancerSourceRanges if service.beta.kubernetes.io/load-balancer-source-ranges is set.

I assume the operator should actually set `spec.loadBalancerSourceRanges` only after the 4th step when annotation gets removed. 

Do I understand it right or did you think it differently?

Reviewer 3: On further thought, maybe we can strike my third bulletpoint about not setting `spec.loadBalancerSourceRanges` if `service.beta.kubernetes.io/load-balancer-source-ranges` is set.  I believe the third bulletpoint is unnecessary because `spec.endpointPublishingStrategy.loadBalancer.allowedSourceRanges` and `spec.loadBalancerSourceRanges` would be empty after the 4.11→4.12 upgrade, and in that case the annotation takes precedence; and the bulletpoint may be problematic because it may cause a race condition if the user deletes the annotation and then the service controller observes that update before the ingress operator is able to update `spec.loadBalancerSourceRanges`.

### Non-Goals

> N/A

Reviewer 3: To reduce risk of confusion, let's note the following:  This enhancement does not change the behavior or API for LoadBalancer-type services in general (that is, services that aren't managed by the ingress operator).

Author: Added.

are allowed (which is equivalent to specifying "0.0.0.0/0").

```go
type LoadBalancerStrategy struct {
	// ...

	// allowedSourceRanges specifies an allowlist of IP address ranges to which
	// access to the load balancer should be restricted.  Each range must be
	// specified using CIDR notation (e.g., "10.0.0.0/8").  If no range is
	// specified, "0.0.0.0/0" is used by default, which allows all source addresses.
	//
	// +nullable
	// +optional
	AllowedSourceRanges []CIDR `json:"allowedSourceRanges,omitempty"`
}

// CIDR is an IP address range in CIDR notation (for example, "10.0.0.0/8"
// or "fd00::/8").
// +kubebuilder:validation:Pattern=`^(([0-9]|[0-9][0-9]|1[0-9][0-9]|2[0-4][0-9]|25[0-5])\.){3}([0-9]|[0-9][0-9]|1[0-9][0-9]|2[0-4][0-9]|25[0-5])/([0-9]|[12][0-9]|3[0-2])$`
type CIDR string
```

### Workflow Description

1. A cluster admin who wants to limit access to the load balancer to a list of IP address ranges
of their choice sets the `AllowedSourceRanges` field. 
2. Ingress Operator reconciles the LoadBalancer Service and sets the `.Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges`
based on `AllowedSourceRanges`.

#### Variation [optional]

> N/A

Reviewer 3: This looks like a good place to describe the migration workflow.

Author: Done.

### API Extensions

This proposal will modify the `IngressController` API by adding a new 

> variable called `AllowedSourceRanges` to the `LoadBalancerStrategy` 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
field called `AllowedSourceRanges` to the `LoadBalancerStrategy` 
```

If the customer directly sets `.Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges` of the LoadBalancer Service,
its value will be used to set `AllowedSourceRanges` if and only if `AllowedSourceRanges`
was not initially set. Otherwise, `.Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges` is overwritten by `AllowedSourceRanges`.

### Risks and Mitigations

One risk of this proposal is that customers may have already set the
`.Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges` field of the LoadBalancer Service. 
This risk is mitigated by using this value to set `AllowedSourceRanges` 
if and only if `AllowedSourceRanges` was not initially set.

### Drawbacks

This enhancement may bring additional complexity for the customers who are 
used to modify directly the `Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges` of the LoadBalancer 
Service for the same purposes. 

## Design Details

### Open Questions [optional]

1. On Kubernetes API reference, the field 
[`loadBalancerSourceRanges`](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/generated/kubernetes-api/v1.24/#service-v1-core) 
has the warning "This field will be ignored if the cloud-provider does not support the feature.".
However, there is no information about which platforms support this. Is there any platform

> OpenShift runs on which does not support this feature?

Reviewer 3: Excellent point.  If this is only supported on one or two platforms, we need to consider whether this belongs directly under `spec.endpointPublishingStrategy.loadBalancer` or whether it belongs under `spec.endpointPublishingStrategy.loadBalancer.providerParameters.<platform type>`.

Author: I could only find this statement from Kubernetes v1.18 [website](https://github.com/kubernetes/website/blob/dev-1.18/content/en/docs/tasks/access-application-cluster/configure-cloud-provider-firewall.md): `This feature is currently supported on Google Compute Engine, Google Kubernetes Engine, AWS Elastic Kubernetes Service, Azure Kubernetes Service, and IBM Cloud Kubernetes Service.` The current version of the document does not mention `loadBalancerSourceRanges` anymore.

### Test Plan

The operator that manages the IngressController Deployment and related
resources has unit test coverage; for this enhancement, the unit tests are
expanded to cover the additional functionality.  

The operator has end-to-end tests; for this enhancement, a test is added that verifies
the following scenarios:

> 1. Adding/deleting/changing `AllowedSourceRanges` to IngressController and observing `.Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges` on the LoadBalancer Service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Adding/deleting/changing `AllowedSourceRanges` on the IngressController and observing `.Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges` on the LoadBalancer Service.
```

> 2. Adding `.Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges` to a LoadBalancer Service and observing `AllowedSourceRanges` on the IngressController in which it was unset previously.

Reviewer 3: The worrisome part is the migration logic.  Would it make sense to add an upgrade test in openshift/origin for that?

Author: It certainly would. Added that.

> 2. Adding `.Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges` to LoadBalancer Service and observing `AllowedSourceRanges` on the IngressController in which it was unset previously.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Adding `.Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges` to a LoadBalancer Service and observing `AllowedSourceRanges` on the IngressController in which it was unset previously.
```

### Graduation Criteria

N/A

#### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview

N/A. This feature will go directly to GA.

#### Tech Preview -> GA

N/A. This feature will go directly to GA.

#### Removing a deprecated feature

N/A

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

If the customer is directly setting `.Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges` of
the Load Balancer Service, this value will be used to set `AllowedSourceRanges`

> during the upgrade.

Reviewer 3: Are you proposing that the operator would set `spec.allowedSourceRanges`?  The operator shouldn't be updating `spec`; the user owns `spec`, and the operator owns `status`.  Anyway, how would the operator distinguish between (a) the user upgraded and didn't set `spec.allowedSourceRanges` and (b) the user upgraded and later set `spec.allowedSourceRanges` to empty?

Author: This idea is dropped as we have another migration workflow now.

---
title: lb-allowed-source-ranges
authors:
  - "@suleymanakbas91"
reviewers:
  - "@jerpeter1"
  - "@knobunc"
  - "@Miciah"
  - "@candita"
  - "@frobware"
  - "@rfredette"
  - "@gcs278"
  - "@deads2k"
approvers:
  - "@frobware"
  - "@Miciah"
api-approvers:
  - "@deads2k"
creation-date: 2022-07-08
last-updated: 2022-08-22
tracking-link:
  - "https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NE-555"
see-also:
replaces:
superseded-by:
---

# LoadBalancer Allowed Source Ranges

## Summary

This enhancement extends the IngressController API to allow the user to specify a 
list of IP address ranges for an IngressController to which access to the LoadBalancer Service 
should be restricted when `endpointPublishingStrategy` is `LoadBalancerService`. 
By default, all source addresses are allowed (which is equivalent to
specifying "0.0.0.0/0" for IPv4 and "::/0" for IPv6). Currently, the only way for the customers to limit this is by
setting the `.Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges` field or 

> `service.beta.kubernetes.io/load-balancer-source-ranges`annotation for the LoadBalancer Service

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`service.beta.kubernetes.io/load-balancer-source-ranges` annotation for the LoadBalancer Service
```

2. The ingress operator reconciles the LoadBalancer Service and sets the `.Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges`
based on `AllowedSourceRanges`.

#### Variation [optional]

If a cluster admin already set `service.beta.kubernetes.io/load-balancer-source-ranges` annotation,
the workflow differs to be a migration workflow.

1. A cluster admin ensures that `service.beta.kubernetes.io/load-balancer-source-ranges` is set and 
`.Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges` is unset.
2. She upgrades her cluster to OpenShift v4.12.
3. She sets `AllowedSourceRanges` on the IngressController. 
4. The ingress operator then sets `Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges` based on `AllowedSourceRanges`.
5. She removes `service.beta.kubernetes.io/load-balancer-source-ranges` service annotation.

The cluster will be marked as non-upgradable:
- On OpenShift 4.11, if `Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges` is set.
- On OpenShift 4.12, if `service.beta.kubernetes.io/load-balancer-source-ranges` annotation is set.

### API Extensions

This proposal will modify the `IngressController` API by adding a new
field called `AllowedSourceRanges` to the `LoadBalancerStrategy` 
struct type and a new type `CIDR` that is a string in CIDR notation.

> [OpenShift API Changes](https://github.com/openshift/api/pull/1222) contains the literal API changes that we're

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[openshift/ap#1222](https://github.com/openshift/api/pull/1222) contains the literal API changes that we're
```

Author: Fixed.

OpenShift runs on which does not support this feature?

A. I could only find this statement from Kubernetes
[v1.18 website repository](https://github.com/kubernetes/website/blob/dev-1.18/content/en/docs/tasks/access-application-cluster/configure-cloud-provider-firewall.md): 
"This feature is currently supported on Google Compute Engine, Google Kubernetes Engine, 
AWS Elastic Kubernetes Service, Azure Kubernetes Service, and IBM Cloud Kubernetes Service". 
The current version of the document does not mention `.Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges` anymore.

### Test Plan

The operator that manages the IngressController Deployment and related
resources has unit test coverage; for this enhancement, the unit tests are
expanded to cover the additional functionality.  

The operator has end-to-end tests; for this enhancement, a test is added that verifies
the following scenarios:

1. Adding/deleting/changing `AllowedSourceRanges` on the IngressController and observing `.Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges` on the LoadBalancer Service.

2. Adding `service.beta.kubernetes.io/load-balancer-source-ranges` annotation to a LoadBalancer Service and observing cluster's upgradable status.

> There is an upgrade test in openshift/origin to make sure that the migration workflow explained under **Variation** above works seamlessly.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This enhancement adds an upgrade test in openshift/origin to make sure that the migration workflow explained under **Variation** above works seamlessly.
```
Please provide a little more detail about the test.  For example, you could reference the `"k8s.io/kubernetes/test/e2e/upgrades".Test` interface and outline the steps in terms of it; I have the following in mind:

1. In `Setup`, create an IngressController that requests an LB, and set the `service.beta.kubernetes.io/load-balancer-source-ranges` annotation on the resulting LoadBalancer-type service.
2. In `Test`, periodically check the service to verify that nothing updates the annotation or the `Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges` field on the service during the upgrade.
3. In `Test`, verify again when the upgrade is done that nothing has updated the annotation or `Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges`, and verify that the operator has set `Upgradeable=False`.
4. Then set `Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges`, then remove the annotation, and finally verify that the operator has set `Upgradeable=True`.

If necessary, check with someone more versed in upgrade tests to make sure this outline, or whatever approach you had in mind if it differs from what I've described, makes sense to do in an upgrade test and won't break anything (in particular, I'm not certain that causing an operator to set `Upgradeable=False` is acceptable in an upgrade test).

### Graduation Criteria

N/A

#### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview

N/A. This feature will go directly to GA.

#### Tech Preview -> GA

N/A. This feature will go directly to GA.

#### Removing a deprecated feature

N/A

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

On upgrade, `AllowedSourceRanges` is omitted by default, which is consistent with the
feature's absence in older versions.  On downgrade, the IngressController
Deployment is updated, and `AllowedSourceRanges` is automatically

> removed from the Deployment.

Reviewer 3: This is still a little confusing, especially the description of downgrades.  The `AllowedSourceRanges` field is empty by default, so it will be empty on an upgraded cluster, until the cluster admin sets it after the upgrade.  If the cluster admin sets `AllowedSourceRanges` and then downgrades the cluster, then the `AllowedSourceRanges` field will vanish from the CRD; however, the downgraded operator would *not* update or remove the `Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges` field value and would *not* update or remove the `service.beta.kubernetes.io/load-balancer-source-ranges` annotation.  In any case, none of this (not `AllowedSourceRanges` on the IngressController, nor `LoadBalancerSourceRanges` or `service.beta.kubernetes.io/load-balancer-source-ranges` on the service) should have any effect on any deployment.

Author: Thanks a lot, it is very well explained. I'm adding to the EP.

The cluster will be marked as non-upgradable:
- On OpenShift 4.11, if `Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges` of the LoadBalancer Service is set.
- On OpenShift 4.12, if `service.beta.kubernetes.io/load-balancer-source-ranges` annotation for the LoadBalancer

>   Service is set.

Reviewer 3: This is useful information.  However, it describes what the operator does without describing why.  A few words of elaboration would help, something like the following: "The intention is to ensure that the cluster admin does not have configuration in `Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges` prior to upgrading to OpenShift 4.12, since the upgraded operator would overwrite that field.  Then once the cluster is upgraded to OpenShift 4.12, the intention is to guide the cluster admin towards using the IngressController API and deprecate use of the service annotation for ingress."

Author: Thanks, I've added this to the EP.

> ### Version Skew Strategy++

Reviewer 3: Where did the "++" come from?

Author: Fixed.

If a cluster admin already set `service.beta.kubernetes.io/load-balancer-source-ranges` annotation,
the workflow differs to be a migration workflow.

1. A cluster admin ensures that `service.beta.kubernetes.io/load-balancer-source-ranges` is set and 
`.Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges` is unset.
2. She upgrades her cluster to OpenShift v4.12.
3. She sets `AllowedSourceRanges` on the IngressController. 
4. The ingress operator then sets `Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges` based on `AllowedSourceRanges`.
5. She removes `service.beta.kubernetes.io/load-balancer-source-ranges` service annotation.

### API Extensions

This proposal will modify the `IngressController` API by adding a new
field called `AllowedSourceRanges` to the `LoadBalancerStrategy` 
struct type and a new type `CIDR` that is a string in CIDR notation.

[openshift/api#1222](https://github.com/openshift/api/pull/1222) contains the literal API changes that we're
proposing for this EP.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints [optional]

The value set for `AllowedSourceRanges` will be used to set `.Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges` 
of the LoadBalancer Service in front of the router in cloud environments.

> If `.Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges` is set and `AllowedSourceRanges` is empty, 

Reviewer 4: or did I get service field and the ingress field backwards?  if you could clarify in all usages, it would really help less familiar readers.  I didn't even realize they were separate until we spoke in person.

> If `.Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges` is set and `AllowedSourceRanges` is empty, 

Reviewer 4: there's a nice table that shows cases. Shall we include it here?

Author: Nice idea! I'll include it here.

Author: Done.

5. She removes `service.beta.kubernetes.io/load-balancer-source-ranges` service annotation.

### API Extensions

This proposal will modify the `IngressController` API by adding a new
field called `AllowedSourceRanges` to the `LoadBalancerStrategy` 
struct type and a new type `CIDR` that is a string in CIDR notation.

[openshift/api#1222](https://github.com/openshift/api/pull/1222) contains the literal API changes that we're
proposing for this EP.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints [optional]

The value set for `AllowedSourceRanges` will be used to set `.Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges` 
of the LoadBalancer Service in front of the router in cloud environments.

If `.Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges` is set and `AllowedSourceRanges` is empty, 
the controller won't set `.Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges` 
on the service to prevent unintentional overwriting during an upgrade to OpenShift v4.12. 
This will result in marking the cluster as non-upgradable as `.Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges` and `AllowedSourceRanges`
do not match. With OpenShift v4.13, `AllowedSourceRanges` will fully own and overwrite
`.Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges`, also when it is empty. 

> `.Status.AllowedSourceRanges` will reflect the effective value by looking at the `.Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges`

Author: I changed it.

| []                                         | []                                                                 | [foo]                                 | [foo]                                                                    | nothing                   | false -- ingress.spec does not match service.spec |
| [bar]                                      | []                                                                 | [foo]                                 | [foo]                                                                    | Writes service.spec=[bar] | true                                              |
| [bar]                                      | []                                                                 | []                                    | []                                                                       | Writes service.spec=[bar] | true                                              |

> | []                                         | [cow]                                                              | [foo]                                 | [foo]                                                                    | nothing                   | false -- clear service annotation                 |

Author: Exactly.

> | [bar]                                      | [cow]                                                              | [foo]                                 | [foo]                                                                    | Write service.spec=[bar]  | false -- clear service annotation                 |

Author: We agreed on overwriting `spec.loadBalancerSourceRanges`, but we didn't talk further about clearing the annotation. I know David is for clearing it and so am I. So, if you're also in the same mind, I'll update the table accordingly.

> | [bar]                                      | [cow]                                                              | [foo]                                 | [foo]                                                                    | Write service.spec=[bar]  | false -- clear service annotation                 |

Author: I updated the table.

> | [bar]                                      | [cow]                                                              | [foo]                                 | [foo]                                                                    | Write service.spec=[bar]  | false -- clear service annotation                 |

Author: I also updated the migration workflow accordingly.

> | [bar]                                      | [cow]                                                              | [foo]                                 | [foo]                                                                    | Write service.spec=[bar]  | false -- clear service annotation                 |

Reviewer 3: Duplicate row.

Author: Deleted.

| []                                         | [foo]                                                              | [foo]                                 | [foo]                                                                    | nothing                   | false -- clear service annotation                 |
| [bar]                                      | [foo]                                                              | [foo]                                 | [foo]                                                                    | Write service.spec=[bar]  | false -- clear service annotation                 |

> | [bar]                                      | [foo]                                                              | [foo]                                 | [foo]                                                                    | Write service.spec=[bar]  | false -- clear service annotation                 |

Reviewer 3: Duplicate row.

Author: Deleted.

or `Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges`, and verify that the operator has set `Upgradeable=False`.
4. Then set `AllowedSourceRanges`, remove the annotation, and finally verify that the operator 
has set `Upgradeable=True` and `Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges` accordingly.

### Graduation Criteria

N/A

#### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview

N/A. This feature will go directly to GA.

#### Tech Preview -> GA

N/A. This feature will go directly to GA.

#### Removing a deprecated feature

N/A

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

The `AllowedSourceRanges` field is empty by default, so it will be empty on an upgraded cluster, until the cluster admin 
sets it after the upgrade. If the cluster admin sets `AllowedSourceRanges` and then downgrades the cluster, 
the `AllowedSourceRanges` field will vanish from the CRD; however, the downgraded operator would not update or 
remove the `Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges` field value and would not update or remove the `service.beta.kubernetes.io/load-balancer-source-ranges`
annotation. In any case, none of this (not `AllowedSourceRanges` on the IngressController, nor `LoadBalancerSourceRanges` or 

> `service.beta.kubernetes.io/load-balancer-source-ranges` on the service) should have any effect on any deployment.

Reviewer 3: > In any case, none of this (not `AllowedSourceRanges` on the IngressController, nor `LoadBalancerSourceRanges` or 
`service.beta.kubernetes.io/load-balancer-source-ranges` on the service) should have any effect on any deployment.

I assume that this sentence was added in response to my earlier review comment: https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1177#discussion_r954471110.  When I made that comment, you had a statement in the EP that the deployment would be updated, and I only meant that that earlier statement in the EP should be modified or removed; I didn't mean that an explicit statement that the deployment wouldn't be updated was necessary.  Sorry for the confusion!

Author: Right, I deleted that sentence. No worries!

Additionally, the cluster will be marked as non-upgradable:
- If `service.beta.kubernetes.io/load-balancer-source-ranges` annotation is set 
to guide the cluster admin towards using the IngressController API and deprecate
use of the service annotation for ingress.

> - If `Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges` does not match `AllowedSourceRanges` on the 
> IngressController. This can be the case when the cluster admin has configuration in 
> `Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges` prior to upgrading to OpenShift 4.12 that is not overwritten 
> by `AllowedSourceRanges` as it is empty in the beginning.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- If `Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges` on the service is nonempty and `AllowedSourceRanges` on the 
IngressController is empty. This can be the case when the cluster admin has configuration in 
`Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges` prior to upgrading to OpenShift 4.12 that is not overwritten 
by `AllowedSourceRanges` as it is empty in the beginning.
```
Isn't this what we agreed on in discussions with @deads2k and what the table in "Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints" shows?

Author: It is. Thanks for making it more clear.

### API Extensions

This proposal will modify the `IngressController` API by adding a new
field called `AllowedSourceRanges` to the `LoadBalancerStrategy` 
struct type and a new type `CIDR` that is a string in CIDR notation.

[openshift/api#1222](https://github.com/openshift/api/pull/1222) contains the literal API changes that we're
proposing for this EP.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints [optional]

The value set for `AllowedSourceRanges` will be used to set `.Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges` 
of the LoadBalancer Service in front of the router in cloud environments.

If `.Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges` is set and `AllowedSourceRanges` is empty, 
the controller won't set `.Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges` 
on the service to prevent unintentional overwriting during an upgrade to OpenShift v4.12. 
This will result in marking the cluster as `Progressing=True` and `EvaluationConditionsDetected` 
as `.Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges` and `AllowedSourceRanges` do not match. 
`EvaluationConditionsDetected` will be used to evaluate how many customer clusters will be affected
if we block upgrades at a later release.

> With OpenShift v4.13, `AllowedSourceRanges` will fully own and overwrite

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Based on this information, a future OpenShift release may block upgrades when `.Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges` and `AllowedSourceRanges` do not match, and in a release subsequent to that, `AllowedSourceRanges` will fully own and overwrite
```

Author: Applied.

2. Adding `service.beta.kubernetes.io/load-balancer-source-ranges` annotation to 
a LoadBalancer Service and observing cluster's progressing and `EvaluationConditionsDetected` statuses.
3. Setting `.Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges` on the LoadBalancer Service 
when `AllowedSourceRanges` is empty and observing cluster's progressing and `EvaluationConditionsDetected` statuses.

This enhancement adds an upgrade test in openshift/origin to make sure that 
the migration workflow explained under **Variation** above works seamlessly.
In detail, it implements 
[Test](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/test/e2e/upgrades/upgrade.go#L46) 
interface that includes the following steps:

1. In `Setup`, create an IngressController that requests an LB, 
and set the `service.beta.kubernetes.io/load-balancer-source-ranges` annotation
on the resulting LoadBalancer-type service.
2. In `Test`, periodically check the service to verify that nothing updates the annotation
or the `Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges` field on the service during the upgrade.
3. In `Test`, verify again when the upgrade is done that nothing has updated the annotation

> or `Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges`, and verify that the operator has set `Upgradeable=False`.
> 4. Then set `AllowedSourceRanges`, remove the annotation, and finally verify that the operator 
> has set `Upgradeable=True` and `Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges` accordingly.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
or `Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges`, and verify that the operator has set `Progressing=True`.
4. Then set `AllowedSourceRanges`, remove the annotation, and finally verify that the operator 
has set `Progressing=False` and `Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges` accordingly.
```

Author: Fixed.

`.Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges` is unset.
2. She upgrades her cluster to OpenShift v4.12.
3. She sets `AllowedSourceRanges` on the IngressController.
4. The ingress operator then sets `Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges` based on `AllowedSourceRanges` 
and clears `service.beta.kubernetes.io/load-balancer-source-ranges` service annotation.

### API Extensions

This proposal will modify the `IngressController` API by adding a new
field called `AllowedSourceRanges` to the `LoadBalancerStrategy` 
struct type and a new type `CIDR` that is a string in CIDR notation.

[openshift/api#1222](https://github.com/openshift/api/pull/1222) contains the literal API changes that we're
proposing for this EP.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints [optional]

The value set for `AllowedSourceRanges` will be used to set `.Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges` 
of the LoadBalancer Service in front of the router in cloud environments.

If `.Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges` is set and `AllowedSourceRanges` is empty, 
the controller won't set `.Spec.LoadBalancerSourceRanges` 
on the service to prevent unintentional overwriting during an upgrade to OpenShift v4.12. 

> This will result in marking the cluster as `Progressing=True` and `EvaluationConditionsDetected` 

Reviewer 4: thanks.
